Analytical framing notes
9.17.2025
Factors that influence math grade


Instructor lenience/strictness
Time since last math class
Class timing (early Monday morning?  Late Friday afternoon?)
Course load
Other demanding courses / poison combinations
Class size / individ attention


Math ability: 
  No access to ALEKS or Accu-Placer test scores / math placement tests	
  Test scores
  Number of AP credits and GPA (can't break out math AP)
  (What if they are just good at math and are lazy?)
  Major declaration
  Transfer credits		  


NO MATH TRANSCRIPTS	

Study ability:
  High school GPA
  Number of AP credits and GPA
  High school (college high school / private high school)
  Commute time/Distance from campus/living on campus


Student success metrics:
  Subsequent course GPA	
  Switching majors	
  Years to graduate	
  DFWI credits	
  Retention / drop out	
  Persistence / transfer (?  Do we have transfer information?)
  Educational ROI -- grad school placement and first year earnings (what a myopic metric)


How much does Year 1 math performance predict Year 4 outcomes?  (Major/GPA/course credits)

Diff't cut-offs for diff't majors?  STEM vs non-STEM
What majors require what math?  At what cut-offs?	


Assumption with the levels of passing math classes.
What are the DWI rates for math vs non-math in first year?  Is it Math that's fouling them up, or is it something else?

Add that's the baseline -- you won't get below that.  

What other classes are they flunking?  Where else is a DWI? Why would they ride out math if failing elsewhere?	

Mode -- 

Read in High School Transcipts from USHE, but IT shut it down because we had to pass identifying information to it.
USHE is insistent that name and birthdate aren't identifying (??!)  Been dead in the water but the convo is still taking place in the background.

No math mentions in application letters, not explicitly.  References to robotics and engineering teams, though.

There is a data source, though -- this has their senior year courses.   A couple of years of it.

Could send me the math courses -- sent.

BIPR.slate


==

What's my decomposition here?

1.  Predict math success



