
Discussing Math Recommendation Summaries
2.23.2026
Whitney Holt	

PURPOSE:   Review drafts of summaries
PROCESS: 
  - Discuss potential audience, their needs and questions, and past feedback on reports
  - Discuss messaging and summaries
PAYOFF: 
 - Take next steps on prioritizing the messaging and merging the summaries

SUMMARY: 
 - Lose power of reports after they are emailed (who reads them or what conclusions they take.)
 - This will probably be read first by Lindsay Coco, and then maybe by Chase.  They prefer a plain-language one page summary without any technical jargon.	
 - Simplify, simplify, simplify:  This first report will only include the predictions and nothing else.	
 - Bill to modify Whitney's summary lightly to add in his work	
 - Bill to modify his "Project Overview" as the "bridge" between the one-page summary and the appendices, removing material not related to grade prediction

==
Tues:  
Chase Hagood, Vice Provost, Head Office for Undergrad Studies. He talks with deans.

Also Jim Agutter and Lindsay Coco (Chase's Deputy)

Also Luis and Liz Conder

His proririties, and people who roll up to him.
Mostly  coordination. 

UGS is broad, sometimes stuff I don't know about.	

Just 30min.  

Reports that people like-- SI, Taylor Johnson, part of the Learning Center that rolls up to Chase.  It seems to stay there but they like it.

And they also like the Retention Analysis, seen by Chase, got feedback from Ravneet via a game of telephone, Chase liked the retention report is that it was to-the-point without too much technical language and what was found, potential outcomes, and not a lot of technical language.	  BRIEF NO TECHNICAL LANGUAGE

WHO IS THE AUDIENCE? -->
Will share with the math dep't.  
Chase may not read, but Jim may read or probably Lindsay.  Not an executive assistant, but special projects.  Not her official title. Lindsay was "Innovation Alliance" but handed that off to someone else.	
Could percolate all the way up to Mitzi. Depends on the conversation as it's passed around.

Once something leaves our office, no control of where it gets  forwarded.  A possibility this could end up anywhere with anyone.	

Luis has brought up this math course recommendation, and Chase hasn't.

This project has been a bullet point in project tracking since November.  "Working on it; something soon."  Haven't discussed at depth but Luis, Liz, Chase, Lindsay, Jim, know that we're working on it with some level of interest.   But no specific conversations about it [[!]]

Whitney:  I shared my document, and  he said, "Great get Bill's stuff in here."	

(1) Whatever project summary we share needs to be one page and excludes all technical information.  Anything that is not common English.  They'll likely mis-interpret it OR their eyes will glaze over.

One-pager in the yellow documents is a good highlight but that type of layout and length is what we need to shoot for.  Use a lot of content from the 10-ish pager from the newest information to synthesize that one-pager for all relevant information but not too much depth.

Appendix 1a and 1b -- we need to add add'l appendices for each of my components.  Added there.  

And then what we could do is insert this 10-pager.  A non-technical, and the overview, and the appendices. 

Then send the Word document, very long, which is ten pages, and also do, extract the single one-pager as a stand-alone.  1 pager, 10 pager, and a 50-pager.  


Stopping Point #1 -- Let's just do prediction.  
At the end, we can mention Stopping Point #2.  


Bill:  I'll add one bullet point to the summary.

AND the 10-page bridge.
AND all of the appendices.		

And will put in a one pager and just modify that one.  

Modify it.
Ten page bridge [Project Overview.] With the correct level of header.		
And then add the appendix pieces.	

Because I made a copy, we can revert at any time.  Make any direct edits as you want.	

Peel out Step 2 and Step 3 in the bridge document --- just refer to it!

So this is truly Part 1 document.		

Any time before 3 -- available.	




















	







 