Notes, Check in
10.3.2025

Whitney shares a dashboard on
first math course taken by first time students 

Shows a table of grades 
(first math class taken at the U)

W? --> Not a pass or a fail, as if they never took the course.

Put 'em back in, including NC and C.
Put W back in,

WIE's that's part of it (?)
Put in I,
leave out P/F and "Audit" grades (V',s and P's leave out) (T's ?)

W's are a big deal.	

Make a bucket for HSGPA.  Percentiles?  I think it could be usable.  Similar to 	

Luis:
Getting ahead of ourselves, but... admissions pipeline data design.  Getting new data compared to AP scores and can open that black box.  I don't have a timeline for that. It's possible we might see that in the spring

Two types of models and three different groups.

Target variable was pass/fail.  

How to treate the "rare" grades? --> leave them as NULL here.	

For modeling, only considering actual grade (highlighted, Only E thru A, not I or W)

Broke out 3 diff't students for modeling-- not mutually exclusive
All students with HSGPA
HSGPA + ACT
HSGPA + SAT (dropping "writing")

modeled most common math courses individually	

Scrolls through --- it's HSGPA and HSCREDIT

Luis:  Model 1, should be EVERYONE at the U as they have a HSGPA

Plan to do "odds-ratios" and "marginal effects".  

How many observations for SAT? --> 2,000 students.

Politics:  During Covid, made standardized test scoring optional.  Ended getting 50% of students submitting.  At war over including or not.  Everyone knows HSGPA, but it comes out as significant when you put it in.  "Optional" won. 

Three models, whether they have it or not.

All students have to have a HS GPA, and leadership has to decide if they have an ACT score as well, how to incorporte into math placement.

Engr says it's a closed major and must have  standardized test scores.  

Whitney:  Correlation between 'not' submitting and what it means.  Include whether it was admitted or not?	

Luis:  I've run it for retention.   Says you can have a "dummy variable" for submitted or not.  Guarantee--pretty sure!--it will come up as significant.	

Reckoning on standardized scoring and lower was clear, and statistically significant.  

Accuracy, prediction, recall--

INCREDIBLE!  WOW!  Do I believe it?

Course specific models, over 500 students, as low as 42 students. 

Says throw out Math 2210, but changes mind.

Says throw out SAT model.	


ADD "EU"to my fail grades as an "unofficial withdrawal."  Automatic failure if they don't take the final.	

"EU" means would fail but they didn't do everything.

"I" grade is a negotiation between faculty and the student.  Our data has "I" but will turn into an "E" or "EU"

HSGPA of 0 is definitely an error.  Kick 'em out.

Grade inflation due to CR/NC, not going into GPA but more students are choosing it.  That might explain the grade inflation.  

Opting to take a CR/NC is probably not a high grade.  We've been lenient on that after 2020.   Not sure when we've stopped that policy.	

Kick out negative folks in "yr_diff" graph.  Could be an error; possible as a concurrent enrollment.

<0 yr_diff (remove)


==

Working on the same data.

Kick out the wonky outliers (HSGPA == 0; over 4.0 GPA; no pre-COHORT classes; 

Run next steps;
Interested in "W" model (priority) 
These are a big deal on campus.

Run add'l models besides adding the dummy variable for standardized testing	

Re-visit week of 13th and 17th. 

That's when USHE lifts embargo and a lot of needs.  Can do the week of the 20th.	


	









