Meeting Notes, Raw Data Review
9.19.2025


Ultimate goal is -- place students into classes.  

We can't suggest solutions

Only information -- is about three factors.	


Handing off --all-- dashboards to her and Sarah

All student success and transformative leaders (4 -6 leaders with various projects)
  They all report to Dr. Brandon Johnson


Regular day-to-day adhoc stuff.


Luis says:  I just want high school stuff-- that's all I'm doing.

Luis is in rooms where we'll never set foot


FACTORS THAT AFFECT GRADE:  

Academic Preparedness (if you took AP Calc in high school, only pass AP tests by skin of teeth, diff't level of preparedness, a 3 instead of a 5.  Math 1050 in HS and you did great then probably ready for the next course with a C- you probably aren't ready.)


Math ability (good at math or not)	
Study ability (studious/disciplined)
Tutoring	
Available time for studying (whether they have a part time job / full time job)
How many other credits they are taking	
Course combinations / other demanding courses	

Time of day for the class (early AM or late evening)
Class size / class capacity (how stressed out teachers are)	

Class modality	

Do they have a T.A. 
Grading responsiveness / fast grading and feedback	

Tutoring

MOTIVATION -- does major have anything to do with math, or is it just a GenEd req't ?



Time since last math class / math freshness 	

Instructor leniency	



WORK REPOSITORY? 
  Create a "predict math success" U-box folder and a "recommend math course" U-box folder	

Do I have access to "Box" on my folder.  When I log in onto the web,  I can manage permissions there.  Had him do a UGS,  and an "Analytics Reporting" folder	


MOTIVATION x ABILITY = PERFORMANCE 

Classes in which I know the other students / study groups / friends.  A BIG factor in whether I had a community around me or not.	


DISTANCE TO CAMPUS (subset of study time / long commute?  And community)


Looking at the data:

Do we have a field that says what they are when 


FTF Freshman, and just by cohort.  Pulled the minimum term for each student in which they took a math course.  And then subtract the first time they took math from the co-hort term and first math

Fresh/Soph is credit-based and not time-based.	

Credit breaks to determine level.   Can also look at the utility tables (but she doesn't use it very often.)	

SUBTRACT THE COHORT TERM and that's the year to the math course.	

Took the first time they took a math class and compared to the co-hort term and that's the first year.

Spoiler:  80% of FTF take math class in their first year.  



Just a check-in -- at the end of next week.  --> Sure.


Whitney to send -- years until the first class

All of it in SQL Developer.	
How long until the first math class?


I can open what she has in notepad as text.  She'll send me a web-link.	


Her own folder called "Math Placement" -- when click on file name, and it opens into Web site.	

This file will change as it's web-based.  

ttps://uofu.box.com/s/oxf9yvui69by7d6a5o738odmryncwc0l

6 seconds to query 23,000 lines. 

Sometimes the VPN can throw off query time.	

SQL Developer is optimized to only return first 50 rows.	


Next will put together data set for the logistic regression.  

Then some initial log regressions.	

If I have Q's about the file, feel free to ask and talk about it.

End of next week -- 



	










 















